JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
behind the hack.
A U.S. intelligence report finds
Russia's
President Putin ordered the
campaign to influence
our election, with a clear
preference for
Donald Trump.
Also ahead: the latest on
today's deadly shooting
at the Fort Lauderdale Airport.
Then, I sit down with Secretary
of State John
Kerry to talk about U.S.-Russia
relations
in the aftermath of the election
hack and
diplomatic challenges ahead for
the Trump
administration.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: It's
going to take a lot of work.
It's not going to be easy, and
it has to be
done in a way that is
verifiable, real, without
giving up American principles
and values in
the process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze the week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The FBI, the CIA
and National
Security Agency are out tonight
with a final
report on Russian meddling in
the 2016 presidential
election.
They say they're confident that
Russia's President
Vladimir Putin personally
ordered it, with
a -- quote -- "clear preference"
for president-elect
Trump.
Before he was briefed on the
findings today,
Mr. Trump said it was all --
quote -- "a political
witch-hunt."
Afterward, he said it was a
constructive session,
but noted the agencies found
again -- quote
-- "absolutely no effect on the
outcome of
the election."
In fact, the report says
officials didn't
assess the effect of the Russian
efforts.
We will look at all this after
the news summary.
The day's other major story is
in Florida.
Panic erupted at the Fort
Lauderdale Airport,
when a gunman shot five people
to death and
wounded eight more before he was
captured.
William Brangham picks it up
from there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The shooting
set off an
afternoon of chaotic reports
about exactly
what was going on.
Steve Mort of Feature Story News
is at the
Fort Lauderdale Airport.
And he joins me via telephone.
So, Steve, I understand you were
there soon
after this attack came to an
end.
Can you tell us what you first
saw?
STEVE MORT, Feature Story News:
Yes, we were
here very soon after it took
place, maybe
about 20 minutes to half-an-hour
or so.
And as we got to the airport, we
tried to
find a vantage point to
establish our camera.
We managed to find a vantage
point on the
parking garage that was
overlooking terminal
two, where the shooting took
place, of course,
in the baggage claim area.
And what happened was, there
were subsequent
reports of a shooter inside that
parking garage,
and that prompted the SWAT team
to move in.
They moved us, as well as other
passengers,
members of the public that were
in that parking
garage out and into one of the
other terminals
here at the Fort Lauderdale
Airport.
Now, it was a very surreal
situation.
We had to duck behind cars as
SWAT team members
spotted an unidentified
individual within
the parking garage, which, of
course, triggered
multiple rumors there were, in
fact, other
shooters, a very common
phenomenon in mass
shooting incidents, which many
of us who have
had the misfortune to cover them
know well.
Eventually, we did manage to
reach the terminal.
We saw several groups of people
who had been
asked to clear areas by the
police, running,
screaming, many of them not sure
what was
going on.
So, it was a pretty chaotic
scene.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, we
understand from the
sheriff and from the governor
there is a suspect
named Esteban Santiago who has
been apprehended.
He is now believed to be the
only shooter.
What do we know about who this
man is?
STEVE MORT: Yes, that is
correct.
We do understand at this stage
that he did
act on his own.
We understand that he boarded a
plane in Alaska.
We understand that Esteban
Santiago then flew
to Fort Lauderdale, where he
unpacked from
his packed -- or from his
checked baggage
a firearm.
We understand that he flew with
it, he checked
it into his checked luggage.
Of course, you're allowed to do
that.
You can't take firearms on the
plane.
You can put them in your checked
bags.
He took a gun out of his checked
bag, went
to a bathroom in the baggage
claim area or
adjacent to the baggage claim
area in the
terminal two here at the
airport, when he
loaded the weapon, then went
back out into
the baggage claim area and
opened fire.
In terms of the suspect himself,
Esteban Santiago,
we're getting sort of patchy
details about
his background.
He is suspected to be a former
U.S. Army soldier
from the New York area.
Now, we do know that Esteban's
brother says
that he had been receiving
psychological treatment
while living in Alaska and that
Esteban's
girlfriend had alerted the
brother to the
situation after the shooting had
unfolded.
Now, of course, the main point
now for authorities
will be to try to figure out
exactly what
the motivation here was in this
attack.
We don't believe at the moment,
according
to authorities, that there was a
terrorism
motivation here, but certainly
FBI officials
are going to be questioning him
intensely
over the coming hours and days,
trying to
find out exactly why he carried
out this attack.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Steve Mort of
Feature Story News, thank you
very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The
election of Donald Trump as
president was
certified when Congress tallied
the Electoral
College votes.
Vice President Joe Biden
presided, as a number
of House Democrats objected, but
none had
the support of a senator, as the
rules require.
WOMAN: Even as people waited
hours in Georgia...
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: There is no debate.
There is no debate.
If it's not signed by a senator,
the objection
cannot be entertained.
WOMAN: Mr. President, the
objection is signed
by a member of the House, but
not yet by a
member of the Senate.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, it is over.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Trump
finished with 304
electoral votes to 227 for
Hillary Clinton.
She won the popular vote by a
margin of about
2.9 million.
The president-elect was busy on
other fronts
today.
In a series of tweets, he
disputed reports
that U.S. taxpayers will pay for
a wall on
the Mexican border under a plan
his own advisers
shared with Congress.
Instead, he insisted that Mexico
will reimburse
the cost later.
And he mocked Arnold
Schwarzenegger's low
ratings as his replacement on
the new "Celebrity
Apprentice" television show.
Mr. Trump wrote -- quote -- "So
much for being
a movie star."
Job creation in the U.S. slowed
last month,
as the unemployment rate ticked
higher.
The U.S. Labor Department
reports the economy
saw a net gain of 156,000 jobs.
The jobless rate edged up to 4.7
percent,
as more people started looking
for work.
Hourly pay rose nearly 3
percent.
That's the most in more than
seven years,
as employers paid more to
attract and to keep
workers.
From President Obama today, a
challenge on
repealing Obamacare.
He says that Republicans need to
present their
alternative before they repeal
the existing
law.
In an interview with the news
Web site Vox,
he acknowledged the Affordable
Care Act has
flaws, but he challenged critics
to come up
with an improvement.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I am saying to every Republican
right now,
if you, in fact, can put a plan
together that
is demonstrably better than what
Obamacare
is doing, I will publicly
support repealing
Obamacare and replacing it with
your plan.
But I want to see it first.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans have
yet to agree
on their own plan, but they say
they hope
to enact repeal and to vote on a
replacement
this year.
Russia announced today that it's
withdrawing
some of its forces from Syria,
starting with
an aircraft carrier and other
warships.
The carrier the Admiral
Kuznetsov was deployed
in November, as Russia
intensified airstrikes
on Eastern Aleppo.
That's the city that fell to
Syrian government
forces on December 22.
The long-running search for
Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH370 will finally end in
two weeks.
Malaysia's government says it's
calling a
halt, as teams finish searching
more than
46,000 square miles in the
Indian Ocean.
The airliner disappeared in
March of 2014,
with 239 people on board.
Debris has washed up in Eastern
Africa.
Back in this country, states
across the Deep
South declared emergencies today
ahead of
a winter storm, and Atlanta
braced for the
worst.
A 2014 storm paralyzed the city
and stranded
thousands of people overnight on
jammed highways.
Officials said plans are in
place to avoid
a repeat.
Wall Street closed the week on a
high note.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 64
points to finish at 19963, after
flirting
with 20000.
The Nasdaq rose 33 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly eight.
Both the Nasdaq and the S&P
closings were
new records.
And Michelle Obama had her final
formal event
as first lady today.
She spoke at a White House event
for the school
counselor of the year, and she
spoke directly
to the nation's youth.
MICHELLE OBAMA, First Lady: Lead
by example
with hope, never fear, and know
that I will
be with you, rooting for you and
working to
support you for the rest of my
life.
Being your first lady has been
the greatest
honor of my life, and I hope I
have made you
proud.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obamas have
two more weeks
in the White House, until
Inauguration Day,
January 20.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a first look
at the intelligence report on
Russian hacking;
Secretary of State John Kerry's
view of Russia
and the state relations with the
rest of the
world; Mark Shields and David
Brooks analyze
the week's news; plus, much
more.
world; Mark Shields and David
Brooks analyze
the week's news; plus, much
more.
We return to the report issued
this afternoon
by the U.S. intelligence
community on what
it calls Russian activities and
intentions
in recent U.S. elections.
The report is a public version
of a highly
classified assessment given to
the president
and other top officials.
It alleges that Russia used
covert operations
to steal material from the
Democratic Party
and others, and disseminated it
through media
organizations that it controls
and through
third-party groups.
It called the campaign a
significant escalation
of Russian efforts to -- quote
-- "undermine
the U.S.-led liberal democratic
order."
For more on the report's
findings and its
effects, I'm joined from Capitol
Hill by California
Representative Adam Schiff.
He is the top Democrat on the
House Intelligence
Committee.
And, for the record, we called
every current
Republican member serving on the
Senate and
House Intelligence Committees.
None was available.
Adam Schiff, Congressman Schiff,
thank you
very much for joining us.
Now, this report says it has
high confidence
that President Vladimir Putin
personally ordered
this campaign to interfere with
the U.S. election.
It doesn't say how it knows
that, but after
you were briefed and have read
the classified
report, are you confident that
that's what
happened?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D), California:
Well, I am very
confident in it.
And I think all the members of
the Intelligence
Committee, Democrats and
Republicans, are
confident in the conclusions
about the Russian
involvement.
I have been on the committee now
for almost
10 years, and this is among the
best documented,
most ironclad, I think,
intelligence reports
that I have seen on any major
issue.
If this doesn't persuade Donald
Trump about
the facts, nothing will.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The report, also,
Congressman
Schiff, says the Russians
developed what they
call a clear preference for
Donald Trump.
How so?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, there are
many reasons
why the Russians prefer Donald
Trump.
I think, in the first instance,
they wanted
to tear down Secretary Clinton.
They, I think, despised her
remarks about
the flawed 2011 elections in
Russia.
They feared that she would be
very tough on
Russia in terms of sanctions.
Donald Trump, on the other hand,
they had
every reason to want.
It was somebody who belittled
NATO, who praised
Putin, who I think would be much
more amenable
to their policy in Syria, where
they bomb
civilians.
So there were a lot of reasons
for them to
prefer Donald Trump.
It was their aspiration, as the
report makes
clear, to help him and to hurt
her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The report also
points out
that the Russian -- how the
Russian military
intelligence passed along this
information
to WikiLeaks, the so-called
transparency organization.
We know Julian Assange, the
founder of WikiLeaks,
say they didn't get it from the
Russians.
What evidence is there in the
report that
there was collaboration between
the Russians
and WikiLeaks?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: You know, I can't
go into that
evidence, because that's really
the heart
and soul of the classified
report.
But I can say I think the case
is very powerful.
WikiLeaks was a useful medium
for the Russians.
They had a little more distance
or deniability
with WikiLeaks than they did
with their other
cutouts, so they made ample use
of it.
I think Julian Assange knows
this, or he is
affirmatively trying to stick
his head in
the sand.
But, nonetheless, it was a very
useful platform
for the Russians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Before this
report became public
and, in fact, before
president-elect Trump
was briefed, he said that this
whole thing
is a political witch-hunt, the
findings by
the U.S. intelligence community.
What's your reaction to that?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: My reaction is
this.
We need Democrats and
Republicans in Congress
to work together to fashion a
very comprehensive
pushback to Russia, not just the
cyber-hacking,
but their bribery of officials
in Europe,
their social media campaign,
their overt media
campaign.
All of the dirty tricks,
basically, the Russians
employ to tear down liberal
democracy, we
need to work together on a
bipartisan basis,
and we need the new president's
help.
We can't do it alone.
And that has to begin by his
acknowledgment
of the facts.
We need him to lead the liberal
democratic
order around the world.
No other nation can do that the
way we can,
and it's going to be very hard
for Congress
to do it over his opposition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, one of the
other -- one
of the comments he made after
the briefing
was he pointed out and
emphasized, he said
he appreciated the briefing, but
he emphasized
that the alleged Russian action
had, in his
words, absolutely no effect on
the outcome
of the election.
Now, my reading of what was made
public from
this report is that they didn't
examine whether
the hacking affected the outcome
of the election.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: That's exactly
right.
And I think that was very
misleading of the
president-elect to suggest that
this report
or the presentation said there
was no outcome
effect, no effect on the
election itself.
It is true there is no evidence
that the tampering
with voter machines or tampering
with voter
registrations or any of like
that affected
the counting of the votes.
That's true.
That's not the same thing as
saying there
was no impact on the outcome.
Clearly, the daily dumping of
information
that was damaging to Secretary
Clinton and
helpful to Donald Trump was
hugely consequential.
And it's not the intelligence
community's
place to say whether this was
determinative
or not.
And, indeed, that's unknowable.
But that claim was completely
unsupported
by the report or the briefing he
got today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We know,
Congressman Schiff,
that President Obama did take
some moves,
took measures against the
Russian intelligence
community just in the last few
days.
Yesterday, I interviewed Vice
President Biden.
He said other steps have been
taken that are
not publicly known.
Is it your sense that the U.S.
is responding
appropriately?
Should more be done?
What should Americans -- what
should America
-- what should the United States
be prepared
to do as a result of this?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: I think what has
been done so
far by the current
administration is a first
step.
It is by no means, I think,
sufficient.
We need to work in Congress on a
bipartisan
basis.
We have reached out on the
Democratic side
to Senator McCain and Graham on
a package
of sanctions, broader sanctions,
to make the
Russians pay a price.
But even beyond that, we need a
comprehensive
approach to what is a very
successful, well-funded
Russian effort, through a
variety of vectors,
through, as I mentioned, bribery
of people,
and their media platforms, their
hacking,
the publishing of fake news, the
publishing
of bogus documents, we need to
push back against
all of that.
It's a threat to the German
elections coming
up.
It's a threat to our French
allies, our NATO
allies.
And we need a comprehensive and
hard pushback.
It's the only thing the Russians
understand.
It's the only thing that will
deter them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman Adam
Schiff, the
ranking Democrat on the House
Intelligence
Committee, we thank you very
much for talking
with us.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can read
the full declassified
intelligence report on our Web
site.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And now to my interview with
Secretary of
State John Kerry.
I sat down with him earlier
today at the State
Department, before the public
release of that
intelligence report on Russia.
But I began by asking, now that
we have confirmation
Russia interfered in the
election, does that
fundamentally change
Washington's relationship
with Moscow?
Secretary of State John Kerry,
thank you very
much for talking with us.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: My pleasure.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, now that it
has been confirmed
that the Russians interfered
aggressively
in the U.S. election, does this
represent
a fundamental change in the
United States'
relationship with Russia?
JOHN KERRY: Well, that remains
to be determined.
It certainly represents a major
challenge
in that relationship.
It's a hostile act.
It has serious consequences, and
we're going
to have to work that through.
And I say we.
I mean the United States, the
next administration
is going to have to approach
Russia very clearly
understanding what has happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think more
needs to
be done to retaliate as of now?
JOHN KERRY: Well, I think that
President Obama
made it clear that we would
retaliate at a
time of our choosing and ways of
our choosing.
And that means some of them, the
public will
know about, some of them, they
will not know
about.
Obviously, with two weeks left,
I think that
the administration coming in is
going to have
to make some judgments of its
own about what
the next steps will be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, it's reported
the Russians
were celebrating the election of
Donald Trump.
Why would they be celebrating?
What do you think?
JOHN KERRY: I'm not going to
speculate.
I really think it's too
important.
And I just am not going to
speculate.
I think there has been a lot of
news articles.
You all have been covering this
for some period
of time.
People are going to draw their
own judgments,
but I'm not going to add to that
speculation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you think
Vladimir
Putin wants?
You have been dealing with him
for a long
time.
What do you think he's after?
JOHN KERRY: Well, he's after a
lot of things.
There are a lot of motivations.
He obviously has agreed with us
on some things
and disagreed with us on others.
And we managed to find common
ground and work
together effectively on the Iran
nuclear agreement,
where Russia assumed major
responsibilities
to try to get the agreement done
and to make
it work.
So I can give you a long list of
things where
Russia and President Putin have
found common
ground and worked with the
United States.
But, on Ukraine, on the
implementation of
the Minsk agreement, on Syria,
we have obviously
not been able to find the same
kind of common
ground, despite good efforts.
And those are problems that are
going to continue
into the next administration.
My hope is the next
administration will approach
Russia strategically, with a
clear purpose
of trying to find more common
ground, but
without giving up on fundamental
values and
principles that are at the core
of the United
States' foreign policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, are you
concerned that
that could happen?
You have talked with your
successor, the designate,
Rex Tillerson.
Does he have the same view of
Russian intentions
that you do?
JOHN KERRY: Well, he and I are
going to sit
down, actually, I think next
week, and have
an opportunity to really debrief
and to go
into these subjects.
So, I can't comment on what his
approach is
going to be or what he's
thinking at this
moment about that.
I can tell you that I think
there is an opportunity
here, still, for president-elect
Trump and
then President Trump to try to
reach out to
Russia and see whether or not
they can put
to test the proposition that we
could find
things in which we can agree and
perhaps on
some things on which we're going
to agree
to disagree, but, nevertheless,
put the world
in a better place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, at this
moment, you're
not worried that the incoming
administration
could be naive?
JOHN KERRY: Well, I have
questions, like everybody
has questions, Judy.
But I'm not -- as secretary of
state, it's
inappropriate for me to start
speculating
publicly or get caught up in the
day-to-day
back-and-forth.
I don't want to do that.
I think it's inappropriate.
I think there are clear
strategic possibilities
that, if the new administration
pursues correctly,
could open up avenues of
cooperation and reduce
tensions and perhaps put to test
whether or
not there could be, you know, a
more improved
day-to-day relationship between
us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Syria.
I happened to sit down yesterday
with Vice
President Biden.
I asked him whether that
represented a failure
for the United States.
He said no.
My question to you is, if it's
not a failure,
doesn't it at least, beyond
being a humanitarian
disaster, represent an enormous
missed opportunity
for the United States to shape
events in that
part of the world?
JOHN KERRY: Well, we did shape
events to a
certain degree.
It is certainly going to be
debated whether
or not they were shaped enough
or whether
certain options that might have
shaped them
differently were taken or not
taken.
But I agree with the vice
president that the
fact that we were not able,
which is a disappointment,
clearly, to push the parties
into a place
where they made a different set
of choices,
that's disappointing.
But I don't think it represents,
you know,
some sort of failure on our
part.
You can try and try and push
people.
The old saying, you can lead a
horse to water,
but you can't make it drink.
And here, we led people to
water, the water
of peace proposition, the water
of Geneva
of a process.
We laid out through our
leadership the International
Syria Support Group.
We brought Iran to the table.
We brought Russia to the table.
We had assurances that Assad
would do certain
things.
He didn't.
He chose not to.
So, the Russians failed,
actually, to deliver
Assad in a way that they said he
would.
The Iranians failed to deliver
the process
that they said they would,
because they continued
to prop him up in ways that went
way beyond
the agreement that had been
reached in the
Geneva agreement to try to come
to a political
resolution.
So, look, did the whole process
fail?
Did the international community
fail to solve
it?
Yes, profoundly.
But was that a specific failure
of the United
States?
History will debate whether some
choices might
have been made or not made that
might have
altered that, but I don't think
it falls exclusively
on us that this problem hasn't
been solved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are U.S.
interests advanced
with the way things stand today
in Syria?
JOHN KERRY: With the way they
stand today?
No, nobody's interests are
served by what's
happening in Syria today.
It's a catastrophe.
It's the worst human catastrophe
since World
War II.
And, as I said just now, it
represents a failure
of the entire international
community to come
to grips with solving it.
And it's a tragedy for the
people who have
been caught in the middle.
But I am proud of what our
administration
has done, of what we did day to
day to try
to get a cease-fire in place.
I am proud that we are the
largest donor of
humanitarian assistance for
refugees.
I am proud of what we did with
the ISSG.
And I regret that we were not
able to be successful
in getting the parties to
Geneva.
But I deeply believe that we are
on the cusp
of seeing that happen over the
course of the
next months, and that it will be
the framework
that we put in place that is
ultimately going
to be the structure around which
peace in
Syria is built.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Several other
countries I want
to mention very quickly.
Israel.
You got a great deal of
attention with the
speech you gave about Israel's
policy, talking
about the settlements.
Right after that, they announced
-- Israel
announced they're expanding the
settlements.
We know the attitude about
Israel of the incoming
president-elect, Mr. Netanyahu.
So, my question is, were you as
secretary
of state shouting into the wind?
JOHN KERRY: No, I don't believe
so.
I don't believe so at all.
Every administration through our
history has
said that the settlements are an
obstacle
to peace and they do not have
legal validity.
We didn't break new ground with
that, except
that we reiterated and
reaffirmed that we
are not going to sit by idly and
watch a sort
of extreme element within the
current government
move in a direction that we
believe is dangerous
for Israel, reduces the
possibility of peace,
prolongs the potential of
conflict, and is
completely contrary to American
values and
interests, which have been
expressed by Republican
and Democrat administrations
alike throughout
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Final question.
You're seen as the most
shoulder-to-the-wheel
secretary of state we have had
in a long time.
You have been to every --
virtually every
global -- or you have been
dealing with virtually
every global trouble spot around
the world.
You have given this job long
hours.
You have traveled nonstop.
What are you the most proud of?
What is your greatest
disappointment as you
walk away?
JOHN KERRY: Well, you know, I'm
going to duck
you slightly here, in the sense
that I honestly
don't dwell on the
disappointments.
There are some.
And we have talked about a few
of the things
that are undone.
But I am very proud of the
department.
I think we are more engaged in
more places
in the world, simultaneously
dealing with
more crises, and with greater
effect in those
more places in the world, than
at any time
in American history.
I think the world is safer
without Iran with
a nuclear weapon.
The world has got the potential
to be safer
if we fully implement the Paris
agreement.
So, yes, I think, all in all,
the Obama administration
and what President Obama has
focused on has
lived up to our need to protect
American interests,
to live our values and assert
our values,
and to stand up for future
generations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State John Kerry,
thank you very much.
JOHN KERRY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Happy new year, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: Happy new year,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good seeing you
in 2017.
So, let's start by talking about
this intelligence
report.
Mark, the entire intelligence
community is
behind it.
They're saying without a shadow
of a doubt,
in so many words, they are
confident the Russians
tried to interfere in the U.S.
election and
they developed a clear
preference for Donald
Trump.
What are we to make of this?
Does it change the way we look
at this election?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't know if it
changes the
way we look at it, Judy.
It certainly changes the way we
look at the
United States' relationship with
Russia, I
think, and in this sense, that
the intelligence
community said it made these
findings with
high confidence.
Ever since the weapons of mass
destruction
era and the decision on invading
Iraq, the
intelligence community has been
very, very
careful to avoid high
confidence.
That's saying, we really believe
this to be
true.
They have been more tentative.
There was no question.
They were unequivocal and
emphatic.
Every American ought to be
angry, ought to
be concerned that an unfriendly
nation, a
nation that has cooperated with
us certain
places, but doesn't wish us
well, sought to
sabotage American democracy,
American confidence
in our own democratic
institutions, and to
influence the outcome of the
election.
That's a cause of concern and
worry and anger.
And I would hope that we would
respond, not
as Democrats or Republicans, but
as Americans,
to make sure it never happens
again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, how should
Americans
look at this?
DAVID BROOKS: I agree with that,
with anger,
with shock.
We have sort of gotten used to
the idea, because
of the news leaks before this
report.
But the idea that Russia felt
emboldened and
apparently fearless to go into
our election
and manipulate our own election
process, whether
successfully or not, is a sign
that they are
outside the norms of normal
society.
There's always statecraft.
There's always disinformation.
But this is a step up, a Russia
that feels
completely free to do this, a
Putin who feels
completely free to do this,
without fear of
penalty, and so far paying
little penalty.
Partly, it's motivated, I think,
by animus
toward Hillary Clinton, as we
heard earlier
in the program, things she said
in 2011, 2012,
partly, frankly, a desire, a
belief that feeling
Donald Trump will be tougher on
ISIS.
But the thing that should most
concern us
is a shift in American foreign
policy.
We have had a bipartisan belief
in American
foreign policy based on the
post-World War
II institutions that believed in
democratic
global world, which Russia and
the Soviet
Union was often seen as hostile
to.
And most Republicans and
Democrats have always
basically believed in this world
order.
Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin
and maybe
Marine Le Pen do not agree with
this basic
structure of the world.
They seem to have no respect for
the institutions
that were created after World
War II, and
they see a potential alliance of
populists
around the world who would fight
Islam and
restore a certain semblance of
traditional
values.
And so we could be seeing a
pivot in American
foreign policy that may be on
the mind of
Donald Trump, certainly seems to
be on the
mind of Steve Bannon, his
ideologist.
And this is a piece of that
larger shift.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, Donald
Trump, the
president-elect, does have his
own reaction
to this report.
I mean, you know, joining in
with what David's
saying, I mean, he started out
by calling
it a political witch-hunt.
And then after he was briefed
about it, he
said -- he made a very short
comment and said,
in so many words that, well, it
didn't affect
the outcome of the election.
MARK SHIELDS: As usual, he takes
the big picture.
In other words, I won, and
anything that in
any way diminishes or tarnishes
my personal
victory, I reject.
His disparagement, make that
disdain, openly,
for the American intelligence
community and
its work is damaging to national
security.
I mean, the intelligence
community, for the
security of our nation, for the
well-being
of our nation, for the economic
prosperity
of our nation, competitiveness,
depends on
sources in other places.
And other nations depend upon
our intelligence.
And here we have the
president-elect dismissing,
disparaging, disdaining openly
because it
somehow, in his way -- his
perspective, diminishes
his victory, is just
astonishing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David.
DAVID BROOKS: It's happening on
three levels,
like, this story.
There is the big strategic
level, which I
described.
Then there's the Donald Trump
ego level.
And his ego is like a comet the
size of Jupiter
just traveling through the solar
system, and
we all have to be affected by
its gravitational
pull.
So all of American foreign
policy has to remind
us that Donald Trump really did
win this election
all by himself, and nobody else
could have
helped, and so it was all me,
me, me.
And that seems to be the center
of his views.
And then the third is, this is a
guy who's
going to be taking over a public
office, presidency
of the United States.
He is going to have a system
built around
him.
He will have employees.
And he, as a public servant,
will work with
other public servants,
presumably the intelligence
community.
But he seems completely
uninterested in being
part of this system which our
founders set
up.
And so he seems to still be a
lone wolf insulting
his future employees.
And, believe me, woe to you who
insults the
intelligence community, if
you're president.
You do not want to get on their
bad side,
because, A, they leak a lot.
B, you actually need them to
learn about the
world.
And he seems to be on purpose
alienating the
resources he's going to have to
draw upon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as we just
heard from
John Kerry, Mark, the world is a
more complicated
place than it's maybe ever been.
He talked about the number of
different places
that the U.S. now has to worry
about its relationship
with.
And, right now, we're at this
critical point
where we're changing from one
administration
to the next.
It's always, I guess, a fraught
time, but
it just seems especially so this
time.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, it does, and
I think,
in part, because of the reasons
David announced,
observed earlier, that the
changing sort of
organizing principle of postwar
world and
the United States.
And we know, I think, probably
more keenly
and more acutely, the limits of
our power.
If I could just add one thing to
David's observation
earlier.
And that is, Judy, I have lived
through an
awful lot of transitions from an
election
to inauguration.
It is a period during which
president-elects
follow a pattern.
They become more popular.
What they do is, they submerge
partisanship.
They reach across the line.
They do all sorts of symbolic
things to unite
the nation.
This president-elect has done
just the opposite.
He continued his rallies,
apparently for
self-gratification.
He fired up his true believers.
He continued to disparage and
belittle his
defeated opponent openly.
And toward what end?
There's been no symbolic reach.
He's had interviews, I guess,
with Heidi Heitkamp,
the Democratic senator from
North Dakota.
But there's been no sense of any
strategic
sense of where the country is
going or what
it's about.
Here he is tweeting about Arnold
Schwarzenegger's
ratings on "The Apprentice"?
JUDY WOODRUFF: This morning.
MARK SHIELDS: He's interfering?
He's making 12 calls into Ohio
to defeat John
Kasich's Republican state
chairman in the
Republican state committee vote.
This is pettiness.
And this is -- this shows just
no largeness
of vision.
And it is really distressing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, yesterday,
David, in conjunction
with this, he tweeted another
criticism, I
guess, of the Senate Democratic
leader, Chuck
Schumer.
He called him the head clown in
talking the
way the Democrats are handling
Obama.
I did interview the vice
president yesterday,
who looked right into the camera
and said,
grow up, Donald.
You know, is that the kind of
comment that's
likely to make a difference, do
you think?
DAVID BROOKS: The vice
president?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The vice
president.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm sure
Donald Trump is
growing and maturing as we
speak.
You know, I -- we have gotten
used to analyzing
presidential statements in a
certain way.
Like, what is the policy
implications?
And we take them all very
seriously, because,
when a president speaks, as Mark
said a couple
of weeks ago, that usually means
a lot.
But I have come to think we have
to treat
Donald Trump's tweets like
Snapchat.
It's just something that is
going to go away.
And it flies out of some region
of his brain
and it goes out into the ether.
And usually it's on the realm of
media.
Even in his tweets of Russia, he
was attacking
CNN and NBC for their coverage.
He's a media commentator a lot
of the time,
even with Schwarzenegger.
And so it will exist, and it
will fill conversation
for a moment.
And then, like Snapchat, it will
just go away.
And so I think, until he can
give us something
real, it's sometimes best to
just let them
go with the wind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when he calls
Chuck Schumer
the head clown, Mark, we just
ignore it, or...
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, what does it
help?
How does it possibly help?
He's going to need Chuck
Schumer.
Chuck Schumer is a proud and
able and dedicated
and skillful leader, and you
don't want him
as an opponent.
You don't want him as a sworn
adversary.
And he's a formidable figure
legislatively.
Why do it?
It's gratuitous.
On the Joe Biden interview, of
all sad words
of tongue and pen, these are the
saddest that
might have been.
We went through an election
where we had the
two least-liked nominees in the
modern history
of American polling.
And you could not watch the
interview -- and
I commend you for it last night
-- with Joe
Biden without saying, I like
this guy.
I mean, he is a thoroughly
likable man.
And when he says, grow up, I
mean, it wasn't
said -- there was nothing mean
about it.
It was just -- it was absolutely
what a grownup
would say.
This was a grownup talking.
And the way I thought he talked
about Democratic
values was missing in the
campaign of 2016,
sorely to the Democrats'
disadvantage, it
was just a -- it was a marvelous
-- I commend
it to anybody who missed it for
any reason
to watch it online.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the things
I talked
to the vice president about,
David, was Obamacare
and what the Republicans are
going to do about
it.
The administration is saying
they're afraid
that they can't make any changes
unless they
make bad changes to it.
What do you see going on with
it?
DAVID BROOKS: First, on the
interview, I was
struck by the way he kept
emphasizing the
Democrats did not campaign on
the dignity
of the working class.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: The policies of
the Democratic
Party have always been in
cultural consonance
with the culture of the working
class.
And, somehow, they missed that.
And I thought he was very
honest.
But also on the part of the
interview -- you
saw a man who has been in
governance, as he
said, since he was 27.
And when you're in governance,
you understand
the limitations and the
complexities of governance.
It's hard.
And on Obamacare, I'm not sure
the Trump administration
has thought in any complex way
about how to
repeal and replace.
Repealing first and then
replacing later doesn't
strike me -- and a lot of the
Republican health
care experts I talk to --
doesn't strike them
as just a workable thing to do.
You repeal some of the things,
like maybe
the -- some of the premium
supports that are
in Obamacare, and then you
replace it with
something later, that seems
likely in the
short term to create exactly the
sort of death
spiral and destabilization that
we're all
worried about.
And so it seems to me and it
seems to a growing
number of Republican senators,
including Bob
Corker and John McCain, that you
have got
to repeal and replace at the
same time.
You have to have a plan, or else
you're just
creating a recipe for chaos.
And it's not clear how much
either the House
leadership or the Trump
administration has
thought that through how exactly
how it's
going to work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just 10 seconds,
Mark.
We will be watching.
MARK SHIELDS: What's the big
rush, Judy?
What's the big rush on the
health care plan?
It's been eight years.
So they have had a lot of ideas.
I mean, Paul Ryan said that.
They have got ideas everywhere.
They have no idea what they're
going to do.
Repeal is low-hanging fruit.
They have done it.
They have done it 60 times.
They will do it 60 more.
They have no plan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
thank you both.
Now the latest story in our
series about food
in America, a collaboration
between the "NewsHour"
and NPR.
Tonight, our focus is on
seafood, and specifically
a movement to ensure sustainable
seafood.
That means fish caught
domestically and locally,
and not fished to extinction.
Despite the vast expanse of
shoreline in this
country, more than 90 percent of
the seafood
Americans eat is imported.
Many conservationists, fishermen
and foodies
are out to change this.
Special correspondent Allison
Aubrey of NPR
News has the story.
ALLISON AUBREY: Cape Cod,
Massachusetts, named
for the cod, but that's not what
fisherman
Jamie Eldredge is catching
today.
Cod's been overfished in these
waters.
Now he's laying his lines for a
fish that
most American's have never even
heard of.
It's called dogfish.
And was it a good catch?
How much did you land?
JAMIE ELDREDGE, Fisherman: It's
a daily limit
of 6,000 pounds, and probably
was just a little
shy of it today.
ALLISON AUBREY: That fish ends
up here at
this processing plant just up
the road.
So, this is dogfish here, kind
of a long sharky-looking
thing?
BRIAN MARDER, Owner, Marder
Trawling: Yes.
Yes, it is the most plentiful
fish we have
on the East Coast right now.
ALLISON AUBREY: Owner Brian
Marder says the
Chatham fishermen will bring in
six million
pounds of dogfish this year.
His operation turns that spiky
shark into
long white fillets.
Who's buying this fish?
BRIAN MARDER: This is all being
packed for
the European export market.
ALLISON AUBREY: I'm told that
the French love
it.
They call it salmonetes.
BRIAN MARDER: Salmonete, yes.
ALLISON AUBREY: Which sounds
kind of fancy.
BRIAN MARDER: Yes.
ALLISON AUBREY: Are you telling
me that everything
being processed here is just
going to be shipped
out?
BRIAN MARDER: Yes, it is.
ALLISON AUBREY: Ninety-nine
percent of it?
BRIAN MARDER: Ninety-nine
percent.
ALLISON AUBREY: While all this
dogfish is
shipping out to Europe, where's
the fish that
Americans like to eat coming
from?
Turns out it's being flown in
from countries
around the world, arriving at
warehouses like
this one we visited.
Santa Monica Seafood is one of
the largest
distributors on the West Coast.
This year, they will distribute
42 million
pounds of seafood, much of it
imported.
Lots of fresh caught seafood
going out and
tons of seafood coming in from
overseas, it's
a swap that plays out across the
United States,
according to Jennifer Dianto
Kemmerly Bio.
She's director of Seafood Watch
at the Monterey
Bay Aquarium.
They track and rank
environmentally responsible
fisheries.
JENNIFER DIANTO KEMMERLY,
Monterey Bay Aquarium:
Over 90 percent of the seafood
we consume
in the U.S. is actually caught
or farm-raised
overseas.
And the majority of the seafood
that we catch
in our U.S. fisheries doesn't
stay here in
our local market.
It goes to other countries.
ALLISON AUBREY: Does that make
sense?
JENNIFER DIANTO KEMMERLY: We're
kind of missing
out on the bounty that we
actually have here.
We're not celebrating the local
fisheries
as much as we probably should
be.
ALLISON AUBREY: And that bounty
is so plentiful,
the Environmental Defense Fund
has launched
a campaign to get Americans
eating these lesser-known
species from our own coastal
waters.
NARRATOR: Eat These Fish is a
campaign to
celebrate the comeback of
America's fisheries.
ALLISON AUBREY: Like New
England's overfished
cod, fisheries around the U.S.
were being
depleted.
After environmentalists sounded
alarm bells,
Congress passed an act in 2006
that required
fisheries to set quotas by 2011.
Now fisheries have rebounded.
Nancy Civetta is with the Cape
Cod Commercial
Fishermen's Alliance.
She's been trying to promote the
story of
dogfish.
She says even with all the
demand from Europe,
there's still plenty left here
for Americans
to eat.
NANCY CIVETTA, Cape Cod
Commercial Fishermen's
Alliance: There's so many out
there, that
we don't even catch the quota
the government
allows us.
ALLISON AUBREY: But here's the
challenge.
NANCY CIVETTA: We don't eat
dogfish in this
country.
We import salmon, tuna and
shrimp.
We do not eat the food that
we're bringing
to shore right here.
ALLISON AUBREY: Civetta says
importing most
of the fish we eat could have
consequences
down the line.
NANCY CIVETTA: If we continue to
import and
buy from other countries, then
our fishing
industry could wither away.
If we're going to maximize the
potential of
this fishery, then we need to
create markets,
so that the fisherman can fish
for it, they
can better their bottom lines,
and we can
have a sustainable coastal
community.
SEAN DIMIN, Sea to Table: So
what they do
is they lay down on the bottom
of the ocean.
ALLISON AUBREY: Sean Dimin runs
a company
called Sea to Table that he says
is doing
just that.
SEAN DIMIN: We come out here to
places like
Chatham, fishing communities all
around America's
coasts, and we figure out how to
get the best
directly to chefs, universities,
distributing
directly from the point of catch
to the point
of consumption.
Beautiful photos of the fish
that we can now
sell directly to people's homes.
ALLISON AUBREY: Back at Sea to
Table's Brooklyn
headquarters, Dimin explains
that his operation
is a complete departure from the
traditional
model.
SEAN DIMIN: A big thing that we
do is sell
fish that fishermen are
catching, not necessarily
what American consumers and
diners think they
want.
And that's a big part of what we
do is supporting
American fishing communities.
MAN: That's beautiful.
MAN: Yes.
ALLISON AUBREY: And the model
aligns perfectly
with a big push at university
dining halls
to source their foods from more
local and
sustainable sources.
MAN: On the count of three, say
dogfish.
ALLISON AUBREY: This group runs
the dining
halls at the University of
Massachusetts.
They serve 55,000 meals a day.
They have made a commitment to
bring this
dogfish and other underloved
fish back to
their campus.
It's at university dining halls
like this
one, where thousands of people
eat every day,
that you might be able to shake
things up.
These students are used to
trying new things,
and a lot of them love the
novelty of it.
So what's the appeal here?
Why go out of the way to buy
dogfish?
BOB BANKERT, Chef, University of
Massachusetts:
Being in Western Massachusetts,
we love to
support the Massachusetts
fisheries, and that
it tastes great.
ALLISON AUBREY: University of
Massachusetts
chef Bob Bankert is grilling
dogfish fillets.
He's lathered them in a spicy
seasoning to
make tacos.
At another food station, the
dogfish becomes
an Asian flash fry.
It's drizzled with wasabi mayo
on top.
The students are curious.
A display tells them where the
dogfish comes
from and who caught it.
Selina Fournier is manager of
this dining
hall.
SELINA FOURNIER, Dining Hall
Manager, University
of Massachusetts: There's
students that may
have never heard of such a fish,
and so when
they saw the fish here today,
and then got
to taste it, the whole
association really
creates that story and bringing
it to life,
and hopefully creating something
exciting
that they will want to order
even when they're
not at UMass.
ALLISON AUBREY: Is that your
hope, that you're
sort of setting a new generation
of eating
habits here?
SELINA FOURNIER: Definitely.
We are setting the standard for
the way that
these students hopefully
continue their health
and wellness once they graduate
UMass.
WOMAN: Thank you.
ALLISON AUBREY: Ruth Crawford
(ph) and Ana
Yrazusta (ph) went for the Asian
flash fry.
So, give it a try.
Tell us what you think.
WOMAN: Oh, my God.
WOMAN: It's so good.
WOMAN: Amazing.
ALLISON AUBREY: What's the
biggest appeal
to you here?
WOMAN: It's new, local, fresh,
so healthy.
ALLISON AUBREY: Sea to Table
already has about
1,000 customers, including
dozens of large
universities and restaurant
chefs.
And they're also planning to
roll out direct-to-consumer
delivery, so people can get fish
delivered
right to their front door.
And are you hoping now that, 10
years from
now, most Americans know what
dogfish is?
JAMIE ELDREDGE: Well, we hope
so.
(LAUGHTER)
ALLISON AUBREY: Fishermen like
Jamie Eldredge
are eager to see if companies
like Sea to
Table can capture the taste buds
of the next
generation.
I'm Allison Aubrey of NPR News
for the "PBS
NewsHour" in Chatham,
Massachusetts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally:
Professor Christopher
Emdin teaches at Columbia
University's Teachers
College.
He explains why there are so few
African-American
males teaching our children in
tonight's In
My Humble Opinion.
CHRISTOPHER EMDIN, Professor,
Columbia University
Teachers College: So, when
"NewsHour" asked
me to write and deliver this
essay about why
there are so few black male
teachers, I was
excited.
I agreed.
But I then realized that I
needed to discuss
this issue by presenting it in a
way that
kind of exemplifies the problem.
And the problem is that no one's
really listening.
So, for this essay, you're going
to have to
listen, but do so in a little
bit of a different
way.
See, like some other black
cultural values
and modes of expression that
black male teachers
and their students share and
have in common,
hip-hop is demonized by the
public, and then
it is devalued in schools.
So, whether we're talking about
dance, dress,
slang, entertainment, we have
these forms
of culture that need to be
accepted, with
some limits, of course, in
schools.
And we do that to engage
students and then
to retain teachers.
When they are not accepted,
students underperform,
teachers get frustrated, and
then they leave.
See, black youth drop out, get
suspended at
higher rates.
Schools react about that fact,
so they hire
a black face.
Black male went through hell,
dodged a cell,
got a degree.
School is excited he got hired.
They gave him some mentees.
Now, these mentees breeze
through P.E. with
ease, but at best see C's if the
course talks
degrees or ratio, proportions,
because math
is boring, the language is
anguish.
They languish in their
performance.
Frustrated, they updated their
thug image,
stuck in the sewage cultural
irrelevance created.
Poor instruction, boring
structures.
Then I'm called in to rupture.
And I'm overwhelmed.
Yes, I'm black.
And the kids are black, too, but
what I know
is right to do means breaking
the school's
rules.
So we leave the profession in
every major
city, 40 percent in Chicago, 19
in Philly,
really.
We can't stand being the
teachers that we
hated, but they made us suspend
them and punish
them with bad grades.
The school system is more
diverse than ever,
but I never see myself amongst
the faculty.
And whether I do or not doesn't
make much
of a difference if you hire me,
retire me,
and do not change the system.
Listen, like 50 percent of
public school students
of color, right?
Eighty-two percent of those
teachers are,
the other, white.
Less than 2 percent of those who
teach are
black males.
One in 15 of those same males
end up in jail.
Schools criminalize, and society
despises
us.
For the black male teacher,
frustrations rise
in us.
Now, students respond in anger
and hate schools.
Then the teachers respond and
start tightening
up the rules.
Test prep begets yet even more
frustration.
I prep them for a test they
detest, so they
fail it.
Then I get blamed and nailed to
the cross,
as if I'm the cause of it.
So, of course, I feel I'm forced
to quit.
The source of this often sits at
the precipice
of pessimists who get to spit a
less legit
hypothesis about my grit, when
it's obvious
that I am forced to fit in a
system.
So, I quit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in later
tonight on "Washington
Week": an in-depth look at the
ongoing power
plays between president-elect
Donald Trump,
the Republican-led Congress and
the Obama
administration over national
security, health
care and immigration reform.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week."
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: how health
insurance under the Affordable
Care Act may
change in one state.
And we will be back right here
on Monday.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.